Good evening, and welcome to session 123,
Introduction to Core Data.
My name is Matthew Firlik,
and I am the manager of the
Core Data engineering team.
Show of hands to start with.
How many people know
nothing about Core Data?
Zip, zilch, nada, zero.
Wow, you are in the right place.
How many people of you have used
Core Data a little bit and want
to know more information about it?
Decent.
Now, be honest,
how many of you people know a lot
about Core Data and are here to ask the
really difficult questions in the Q&A?
Thank you for being honest.
You can leave.
All right, so introduction to Core Data.
First question, what is Core Data?
You may have actually looked online,
seen websites,
seen lots of descriptions of Core Data,
and they're a mouthful.
Lots of words like model view control,
object graph management, persistency.
These are very, very,
very sophisticated terms,
and we certainly do all of these things.
But let's actually just
take it down to basics.
What does Core Data do?
So it's a framework that allows
you to interact with your data.
And we're going to break that
up into three different parts.
First is the visualization
and the display of your data.
Obviously, you have something interesting
and you want to display it
through your application.
That could be physically
putting strings on the screen
in text fields and table views,
or that could be using lots
of numerical information to
represent some kind of graphic.
But you want to visualize your data.
Second thing is you want to create,
modify, and delete your data.
Data is more interesting
when we do things with it.
And then the last thing is you want
to save and retrieve your data.
Take all this stuff that you've put
in your application and bring it back.
So these are the fundamental
tenets of Core Data.
And as you start to look at
some of the descriptions,
we'll actually go through and
we talk about modifying objects
and creating and deleting.
That's really the object
graph management part.
So when you see that term,
that's really what that refers to.
And when we talk about persistency,
it's the saving and the retrieving part.
It's figuring out what to do
with your data and how to get
it back to you when you want it.
It's important, though,
to remember that Core Data is
all three of these things.
And you don't necessarily have
to use all three of these things.
You can use any mix of these to
provide benefits to your application.
So don't think just because, "Oh,
I already have my data in a file,
and I don't really need any of this.
This isn't useful to me." You're
going to be very surprised.
So...
Down to the basics.
So we're talking about taking a piece of
data and putting it in an application.
In this example here,
we're going to talk about a
little bit of XML and we want
to put it into an interface,
maybe something looking like iTunes.
The framework provides you the benefit
of doing this through something
which we call managed objects.
And you'll start to hear this
word "managed" going through
the entire presentation.
Managed objects give you the power of
taking data from somewhere and getting
into your application and using it very,
very quickly.
So to describe this,
we're going to take a look at
the Core Data architecture.
We're going to call this
the persistence stack.
And we're going to burn this into
your memory by the time you're done.
And if you can remember this,
you've got Core Data pretty much down.
So we're going to call this the
persistence stack and we're going
to walk through this for pretty
much the rest of the presentation.
So let's start at the top and we're
talking about managed objects.
These are objects that
encapsulate your data,
encapsulate behavior, encapsulate logic,
that give your application power,
power to do something interesting,
power to do something compelling.
The framework also provides you
things called fetch requests,
which pretty much, as the name implies,
allows you to ask the framework,
how do I get something?
Go find something for me and bring
it back so I can work with it.
So you don't have to
keep track of things.
You can let the framework
do that for you.
There's a managed object context,
as the graphic implies.
It's kind of a drafting table.
It's a scratch pad for you
to work with your objects,
create them, modify them, delete them,
throw them away,
do whatever you want with them.
But that's kind of your playground.
Another important element
is the managed object model.
This is a blueprint.
It's kind of your contract between your
application data and the framework that--
along with the persistent store
coordinator figures out how to take
your data from your application
and put it somewhere interesting
and then get it back to you.
And obviously, on the very, very bottom,
we're talking about the persistent store.
This is where your data
is physically stored.
So that's the Core Data stack
in a nutshell.
And we're going to go through this
for the rest of the presentation.
In the upper right-hand corner,
you're going to see a small
graphic of this as we go through
with little sections highlighted.
So in case you get lost or in
case you want to see exactly where
this lays within the architecture,
you can follow along there.
Now we're also going to be talking about
a lot of things that Core Data does.
So from the undo management to
working with Cocoa bindings,
grouping and filtering, validation,
integrity management, persistence,
putting stuff into SQL,
putting stuff into XML,
it does a lot of things.
And it does them all very well.
But I want to reiterate the point of use
as much as you need from this framework.
This framework provides
a lot of functionality,
but it's not totally inclusive.
You don't have to use all of it.
So please remember that as we go through.
You're going to start to see a
theme though as we go through.
If you look in the WWDC sample code,
there's a section called Core Recipes.
That is the Core Data section
for the conference and
includes a number of really,
really handy things.
One of them is all the hands-on samples
that you're going to use for the 9:00
AM session tomorrow that you're all
going to be at to look at Core Data.
Includes command line and
GUI applications that use Core Data.
There's also something
called Core Recipes,
which is our iTunes-like application to
allow you to manage recipe information.
And in addition to using
Core Data and bindings,
it's got some spotlight integration
and it's got an automator action.
And then there's also a migration
example to talk about how to take stuff
from one schema and move it to another
for those people that have already
reached that pinnacle of Core Data.
Let's get started and talk
about the persistent store.
So the persistent store is
obviously where your stuff is saved.
And logically,
it's a file or a collection of files
where all of your information is stored.
Now for the most part,
the persistent store is
transparent to both the
developer and to the application.
So there is some information
about the persistent store.
Core Data remembers a unique ID about
the store and also knows about a type.
We'll get to that in a little bit.
But there's no API on
the persistent store.
Please don't go look for NS persistent
store in the class hierarchy.
It's not there.
What you want to do is
use the store coordinator.
That's where all the power is.
Now, you have a number of options
when we talk about stores.
There's different types,
and there's different
characteristics of those stores.
We'll talk about the first one,
which is XML.
How many of you have
actually used XML before?
All right, so XML is good.
It's very human readable.
You can actually go ahead and look at it.
And it provides actually
decent speed for Core Data.
We also have a store
that's a binary store,
which uses an NSKeyed archiver format
to go ahead and store your data.
Little bit better
performance than the XML.
Now, both the XML and binary stores
use what we call atomic access.
Obviously because these stores
represent an encapsulation of data
is that we need to read the entire
file in when we load the store.
It also means that when we save data,
we need to write the entire store out.
So you can imagine if you
have a big graph of data and
you want to save one thing,
change one thing, and it's in XML,
we need to write the entire XML file
out or the entire binary store out.
So obviously this has
performance implications and
it has speed implications.
So we offer another store type,
which is a SQLite store.
The SQLite store does not
have these limitations.
We can read it in just the small bits.
It offers extremely good performance
because we can actually use
some of the benefit of SQLite
to perform some operations.
So for extreme scalability,
you want to go to the SQLite side,
but you may want to start with the
XML store when you start working so
you can actually look at the data
that Core Data is creating for you.
It's important to note that just
because you start with one store
doesn't mean you can't move to another.
So there is API to migrate data
from one store version to another,
so you could start with XML and
end up in SQLite without having
to do that much heavy lifting.
One of the unsung heroes, though,
of Core Data is the in-memory store.
So as the name implies,
this is a store with no
physical backing on disk.
So when you put stuff into
the store and you save,
it's just staying in
memory where you put it.
But when you think
about this for a second,
this is an extremely powerful feature,
because that means all of
you out there right now that
have existing file formats,
existing pieces of data,
can actually go ahead and create
managed objects out of those and
put them into the in-memory store.
So you can take your persistent file,
put it in an in-memory store,
and take all the benefits of
Core Data-- undo management,
integration with Cocoa bindings,
everything you need.
And then when you use the
framework to get the notifications
when your information is saved,
you can go ahead and
write that stuff back out.
So this is one way you
can leverage Core Data,
even if you have an
existing file format today.
So there's the question of, well,
how many stores do I want to use?
So there are applications
like iTunes and Address Book,
where it's a collection of data.
All the data is stored in one place,
and in some cases,
it's related to one another.
Core Data allows you to do that very,
very easily.
But when you think about it,
these applications also use
many stores collaboratively.
You share your Address Books.
You share your iTunes music.
So it's using the same blueprint of data,
the same kind of data,
and putting multiple things together
so to the developer or to the user,
it looks like one thing.
Core Data makes this very,
very easy to do.
Additionally, we also provide you the
ability to use separate stores,
for example,
in a document-based application,
where your information isn't
related to anything else.
It's all just one piece of data.
Core Data provides you that as well.
And if you're interested in
document-based applications
or you have one now,
there's a class called NS Persistent
Document that you're going
to want to take a look at,
because we've implemented a lot
of the heavy lifting for you,
and you can just go ahead and
leverage that with Core Data.
So then there's question of,
how many stores should
I use in my application?
And the answer is, it really depends on
what you're designing.
So if you have an application
that's just using a small collection
of data that's all interrelated,
you're going to want to use one store.
But then you might want to consider,
is it necessary or is it possible
to share this information?
Can I have people keeping copies
of their own libraries or groups
of information and having the
application pull it together?
You want to consider that.
When you do so,
remember about dependencies,
is that when you start creating stores
that depend on other stores being there,
that's where your application
gets a little more complex.
So be aware about that.
But then document-based stores are
really good for applications where
I just want to create a document,
I want to allow my users to create
things over and over and over again,
and they really don't interrelate.
Let me give you an example.
When we were creating our
Core Recipes application,
this is an application to manage recipes.
We're putting information
into the application and
allow people to look at it.
So the question is,
how do we design this?
So we first thought about,
what about separate documents?
Kind of makes sense.
You're working with something like Word.
You want to just create a document,
type in the recipe.
All makes sense.
But then we came upon the problem of,
well, what about chefs?
What about the people
that create the recipes?
If I have four or five
recipes from the same chef,
I don't really want to have
to type in the chef name
over and over and over again.
Makes more sense to just type
that in once and be able to use
that information over and over.
So we decided to put
stuff into one store.
But then we realized that even better was
a lot of people want to share recipes.
So we want to be able to
have separate applications,
instances, one for you, one for me,
one for somebody else.
Or I could take your recipe file
and just bring it in my application
and it loads it automatically.
So the example that you'll find on
your CD actually is an implementation
using multiple stores with one model.
So I just mentioned Managed Object Model.
Let's talk about that.
So your Managed
Object Model is the blueprint.
It's the blueprint for your data.
So it helps Core Data understand
what the high-level schema is,
or high-level view of your data is.
And if we look at the two
top-level elements within a model,
they are entities and
they are properties.
Entities represent a
classification of object,
if you want to think of it
as a runtime representation.
And entities also have properties,
which are characteristics of entities.
And a property can be one of two kinds.
It can be an attribute,
which you can think of as
just an instance variable.
And it also has relationships.
And relationships are managed
references to other entities.
And those can be in the single form.
So one object is related
to a single other object.
Or they can be in the too-many form,
where one object is related
to many other objects.
Let's take a concrete example from this,
and we're going to use
the idea of our recipes.
So you're looking at a book of recipes,
and you've got a recipe here.
It's got a name, it's got a chef,
it's got ingredients,
and it's got a description.
So how would we model this?
How would we go ahead and create a
blueprint for our application to use?
So the first thing we might do is say,
well, let's just create a recipe entity,
and let's just put a
bunch of attributes on it.
It's going to put the name,
we'll put the chef name, some directions,
maybe a cooking time,
and go ahead and represent
our data this way.
But as we start to look at this,
we notice a couple things.
First is the chef name.
I just got done mentioning that if I have
a number of recipes from the same chef,
I don't want to type this information
in over and over and over again.
Doesn't make sense.
It's very difficult if, for example,
the chef gets married and
changes her last name,
I have to go and change it in every
single place that that chef is placed.
What we really should do is instead
So, in this case,
the white line indicates that's a
relationship from the recipe to the chef.
And it looks to the developer
like it's another property.
So, if you ask for the recipe
and you ask for its name,
it will probably return you a string.
But if you ask the recipe for its chef,
it's going to return you a chef entity.
So, continuing to look at our recipe,
we also decided to put
ingredient list on our recipe,
which doesn't make any sense at all,
because it's a collection of things.
It's a big grouping of things,
and we should probably
separate these out.
So, in this case, we're going to create a
relationship called ingredients,
and ingredients is going to go to a
relationship to an ingredient entity,
and the ingredient is
going to have the name,
the amount, and the measure,
like teaspoons or cups.
But in this case,
you see the double arrow that
indicates it's a too-many relationship.
So, a recipe in this case will
have many ingredients,
but one chef.
So the managed object model gives us
the ability to provide this kind of
blueprint to our application to say,
this is what I want my data to look like.
This is how I want my data
to be used in my application.
Now, it's important to remember,
I just talked about
too many relationships.
Too many relationships are
returned to you as sets.
They are not returned to you as arrays.
Think about that.
They're sets.
They're completely unordered.
So if order is important to you,
you need to consider that when
you create relationships and
when you create your entities.
And you'll hear more on that
in some of the later sessions.
So what happens at runtime?
We take this blueprint,
we grab some of the data from the store,
and we actually go ahead and
create something that if you
printed the description out,
it would look like this.
So this may look like a little
bit of a gnarly information,
but it's basically saying,
this is a recipe.
It's an entity for Core Data.
And you can see it has some attributes.
It has a name,
and it has some cooking time.
And you'll see that in certain places,
like the ingredients and the chef,
it looks like it's
referencing another entity.
So this is how your information
will look when you work with it.
If you spent more time on this model,
you might get something
that looks like this,
which is the representation as
you'll see it within Xcode when
you design a Core Data model.
So you can see here,
you can create a relatively sophisticated
view of recipes and cuisines,
ingredients and measures,
all sorts of things.
If you want to take a look at this
in the Core Recipes application,
there's a Core Recipes model that'll
give you a complete view of what
we created for our application.
And it's important to note that a
model actually does more than just
define entities and attributes.
It actually defines quite a bit more.
You can define default attribute values.
For example,
every time I create a recipe,
I want the name to automatically
start out as new recipe.
This is great for giving users
hints on things they need to change.
It's also great for filling out
attributes that they may want to change,
but in most cases, they don't need to.
So you can provide them the benefit
of not having to change those values.
The model also provides you with
the ability to set up rules,
things like validation rules,
what things have to be there,
has to be between a certain value
range to be able to be saved.
Things like deletion rules.
If I delete a recipe,
should I delete the chef too?
Answering some of those questions and
even customizing the model to store
custom information that you want to use
in your application based on the entity.
All models are represented by a class
called the NSManagedObjectModel.
You can create these in Xcode,
but you can also create
them programmatically.
And there are some number of
examples where we do create
models programmatically and the
number of benefits to doing that.
I can't stress this enough though,
is that your model is absolutely critical
to the success of your application.
When you think about it,
it's the contract between you and
Core Data that sets up guidelines
and policies for how things work.
It sets up how your data is
related and how data interacts.
It also helps the framework
maintain integrity on what things
are supposed to be in what ways.
So your model is really,
really important.
Your model needs to be designed with
both function and performance in mind.
So when you think about
designing a model,
think about what does my information
look like and how do I want to use it?
You can imagine if you put all of
your attributes in a single entity,
it makes it very easy to get at,
because you can just fetch one
thing and it's all right there.
But from a performance perspective,
that's not really good for searching.
Because if I want to search
on just one thing and see some
quick references in a table view,
I've got to fetch the entire entity back.
So you want to think about both
performance and function for your
model when you're creating them.
And there'll be more on this
in some of the later sessions.
But never fear.
The more complicated your model,
the better Core Data does.
Trust me, the framework is really
good at dealing with models.
And the more complex
things you can throw at us,
the more power you're going
to see out of the framework.
So don't be afraid to create something
that looks a little scary if it's
really what your application needs.
So I'm going to get this out of the way.
What about making changes to my model?
So when you create a model,
as I said before, it's a blueprint.
And we use that to go ahead and
create the underlying store.
If you go ahead and you create
a blueprint and you use that
blueprint to put data into a store,
application works just fine.
Now you go ahead and you
make changes to the model.
And then you start your
application back up.
Core Data now says, huh?
Because the Blueprint is now different.
It now expects something completely
different based on the Datastore
does not match the Blueprint,
and we get a little confused.
So consider that.
It's actually something good to
consider when you actually just
create your own application,
about versioning.
I create version 1 today.
I'm going to create version
2.0 maybe six months from now,
and my data may look very different.
How do I deal with that?
How do I deal with the fact that
my model may need to change,
and my application may need
to be smart enough to say,
this is what my data was before.
This is what my data looks like now.
You're just in luck.
We actually happen to have sample code
that actually deals with some of this.
There's an example called the migration.
It has a generator and a migrator,
which actually will generate
some data in one model,
create a new model,
and show you how to migrate
the data from one to the next.
So please feel free to
take a look at that.
But enough of my talking.
Let's actually look at a real
demonstration of building a model.
And so for that,
I'm going to invite Adam Swift,
a Core Data engineer,
to show you creating
a model within Xcode.
Adam?
Okay, so we've got recipes and we want to
build an application to manage them.
So I'm going to open up Xcode 2.1,
which provides some tools to do that.
There are a variety of
templates for projects.
I'm going to choose the
Core Data Application project because
this isn't a document-based project.
The first thing we see when
we open up the project is it's
created some code in the classes,
some models, and some other resources
that I'll use later.
For now, I want to create the model.
So the first step is to open
up the Model Design Tool.
And you can see this window is
divided into two major parts.
At the bottom,
we've got a graphical view,
which shows a sort of bird's
eye view of our data model.
I'll bring that up a little closer.
And then in the top half,
we've got some detailed lists and tables,
which allow us to edit the data model.
A lot of these controls,
and you can see there
are a lot on screen,
are available through the menu
using the design data model menus.
To make it a little easier
to follow what I'm doing,
I've customized the toolbar on
this window to add the entity,
add attribute,
and add relationship buttons.
So the first thing we want to model
with our recipes is the recipe itself.
And as Matt described, that's an entity.
So I'm going to create an entity here.
I'll go ahead and rename that.
And you can see in the entity list
that name change is reflected.
And the first thing I want
to do with this is add the
attributes that define my recipe.
The most obvious would
be the recipe name.
Now,
when I select the recipe entity here,
you can see in the property list it
has the name listed as an attribute,
but the type is not defined.
The name should be a string,
so I'm going to go ahead and set that.
Some other attributes of a
recipe are the directions and
the last time I prepared it.
I'll go ahead and set those.
Directions is another string.
And the last prepared date
I'll configure as a date.
So that's a start.
Now another part of my model,
the data of my recipes, is the chefs.
And we decided that a chef
is a complicated enough piece
of the model that I wanted to
make it an entity all its own.
And also, I want to add the ingredients.
I'll go ahead and rename these.
And I'll set up the chef
with a first and last name.
And one of the nice features
of the tool here is if I select
both of these attributes,
I can modify their type
together to set them to string.
For the ingredient,
something like one cup of sugar,
I need to add the amount, the name,
and the measure.
The amount is a number,
so I'll select decimal.
Name is a string.
And again, measure something like a cup
or a tablespoon is a string.
So now I've got my major entities here.
I'm using a simpler model
than Matt suggested for
the purpose of the demo.
But the recipe doesn't know its chef,
and the recipe doesn't
know its ingredients.
So I'm going to use a--
The button here on top to add a
relationship to Chef from recipe.
And you can see in the property list,
it's created a new entry
here called New Relationship.
I'm going to rename that Chef,
and I want my Chef relationship
to be to the Chef entity.
And you can see when I select the entity,
updated the graphical view below with
an arrow connecting recipe to chef.
To connect the ingredients,
I'm going to use another
feature of the graphical tool,
which allows me to draw the
connection from recipe to ingredient,
where it automatically fills
in the destination entity
based on the connection I drew.
I'll name that ingredients.
And because, except for boiled water,
I always have more than one ingredient,
I'm going to set that to
be a too many relationship.
This means that a single recipe
will have multiple ingredients,
will be able to know about
multiple ingredients.
So right now I have the basic
information for my recipe.
I have a chef,
I have a list of ingredients,
I've got a name and some directions,
but I want to be able to do some
other things with the relationship
between the chef and the recipe.
For example, if I have a chef,
I'd like to know all the recipes
that the chef is responsible for.
So I'm going to create a relationship
from chef to recipe called recipes.
I set the destination to be recipe.
And now you can see in the window below,
it's created that connection.
I'm going to set that to be a
multiple-- a too many relationship.
And now you can see that my chef
knows about multiple recipes.
When I think about it, though,
the recipes I've got
The chef-to-recipe relationship is
really two sides of the same connection.
Now, one of the things I can do in
the modeling tool is to inform
my model that these relationships
are really representing two
sides of the same connection.
And I can do that using the
inverse relationship here.
When I make that change,
you can see in the graphical view
that the two connections have
become one with two endpoints.
It's still two relationships,
one from chef to recipe and
one from recipe to chef,
but it's represented as one
thing because they're connected.
So I've got a basic
working model right now,
and I could leave it as it is.
But there's some other nice things
I can do with the modeling tool that
will help me build a better interface
and help my users understand the
data that they're working with.
So if I select the recipe and
select the name attribute,
I might want to put in a
default value for the name,
such as recipe name.
And I might want to enforce a rule
that the recipe has to have a name,
so I can check off optional
to ensure that a recipe can't
be saved without a valid name.
Another thing I can do is make
my directions non-optional and
also set a minimum length for the
directions to be five characters
and a maximum length to be 5,000.
This will assure that the directions
are always a reasonable size.
I'll set a default value to say,
please fill in the directions here.
And now I've got a pretty reasonable
basic model that I can work with,
and I'm ready to get started on the
next step of building my application.
Thanks, Matt.
Thanks, Adam.
So we've just seen
creating a simple model.
Now the question is,
what do we do with this model?
Well,
the model is one of the crucial pieces
for the persistent store coordinator.
The Persistent Store Coordinator is
essentially the framework's middleman.
This is,
as the object is named appropriately,
it coordinates moving objects
between the stores that we just
saw before and the developer,
so the managed object context that
we'll hear about in a little bit.
We were commonly referred
to this as the PSC,
so if you hear that phrase,
that's what we mean.
The Persistent
Store Coordinator synchronizes access
to all of the persistent stores.
So this means if your application
has more than one store and you're
using one persistent coordinator,
it's the one that synchronizes
all the information back and
forth between those stores.
When you're using a managed object
model and you're using multiple stores,
you can actually specify which
stores contain which pieces of data.
Now,
you could actually save the same pieces,
same kinds of data across all the stores,
so you could basically create a
striping design where lots of pieces
of information that all look the
same are stored in different places,
but there is no support
for mirroring right now.
So you can't create a copy
of one store in another.
So the persistent store
coordinator basically is the
facade in front of the stores.
So it basically works by taking
the managed object model and we
plug it into the coordinator.
And at this point,
the coordinator allows us
to go ahead and load stores.
Now, as I just said,
the managed object model represents the
kind of data that we're working with.
And so you can use the same
model and the same coordinator
to load more than one store.
So I'm going to reiterate that again.
You could actually keep the same
kinds of data in multiple stores
[Transcript missing]
So we load one by default.
But you'll note in the left-hand view,
there's this little
section called imported.
What we do is we've actually
defined a UTI type for our stores.
And using the wonders
and powers of Spotlight,
we actually create a Spotlight query
that knows how to go and find all
of those stores based on the UTIs.
And we automatically load them.
So in essence,
what this allows you to do is take
your Core Recipes application,
go ahead and put some recipes in it.
Now copy your recipe
store onto a shuffle,
walk over to somebody else's computer
who's using Core Recipes app,
and just plug your shuffle right in.
Spotlight is going to tell the
application when that store comes up,
when the store is found,
and our application is automatically
going to load it and bring it in.
So it's a really,
really neat integration of both
Spotlight and the ability to load
stores within Core Data to show you
how to interact with application data.
While we're talking about Spotlight,
what is this metadata thing?
How many of you guys have
written Spotlight importers yet?
How many of you want to?
Come on,
there's got to be more than that.
It's a cool thing.
So Spotlight and
Core Data are complementary.
They're both dealing with data,
but in very different ways.
Core Data is about the data
inside of your application,
all the nuts and bolts.
Where Spotlight is more
about the metadata.
It's these small,
interesting tidbits about your
application that you want other
people to be able to search on.
The Persistent
Store Coordinator provides very,
very easy API to read and write metadata
that you can then use with an importer.
So you can actually go ahead
and look at the NS Persistent
Store Coordinator API for that.
It's very, very simple.
It's metadata for Persistent Store.
And you can actually look in, again,
the Core Recipes application.
We have a Spotlight importer target that
creates an importer for our application.
Now, at this point,
I need to add a standard caveat,
which is there's always a question
of how much metadata do I store?
When you think about it,
if your application has a lot of data
and you want to create a lot of metadata,
you now have two copies of your data.
Your store may actually be very,
very big if you store a lot of metadata
alongside of your regular data.
data.
You may be tempted to say, you know what?
Maybe I don't actually store
my metadata ahead of time.
Maybe I just go ahead and
create a Core Data persistence
stack inside my importer,
go ahead and figure out all the data,
and go and shove that off to Spotlight.
You may be thinking that,
but I would encourage you not to,
in that creating a persistent stack is
not necessarily an inexpensive operation,
and your importers need to be very,
very thin and very, very fast.
So consider very,
very carefully when you're creating your
spotlight importers about how much data
you're saving and how you're doing it.
So once we've got our
data from our store,
and we've got it through
the persistent store query,
now we want to do something with it.
So how do we do that?
We do that through the
managed object context.
And the managed object context is,
as it says,
it's a drafting table for your data.
This is the workspace of the framework.
When you ask for objects
from the framework,
it's going to give them to you
in a managed object context.
When you want to save them or you
want to revert them or undo them,
you do so in a managed object context.
And the context is kind of the gatekeeper
of all the notifications that happen when
things get saved or things get deleted.
That's where you're going to get them.
You should consider it a scratch
pad for working with your data,
because you can undo and revert
changes at any time you want.
So you can go ahead and make five, six,
or seven changes, back out three of them,
make a couple more,
and then throw them all away.
So it really is the place where you do
a lot of your manipulation of your data.
We commonly refer to this as the Mach.
So you have two terms, Mach and PSC.
So when we think about it,
we're going to talk about going ahead
and grabbing data from our object store.
The persistent store coordinator is
going to go ahead and take those objects,
hand them over,
and put them into the Manage
Object Context for us to use.
Now we can go ahead and we
can create changes with these,
make changes, add new ones, delete them,
and at any point in time, to reiterate,
we can go ahead and
just throw those away.
Don't want those, just throw them away.
However, we can also keep those changes,
tell the context to save,
which in turn is going to hand them back
to the persistent store coordinator,
and it's going to go ahead and just
put those right back into our store.
It really is that simple.
And it's all just telling the Manage
Object Context what you want to
save and when you want to save it.
We've talked about multiple stores.
Let's talk about multiple
Managed Object Contexts.
So in this case,
you'll see we have lots of stores here.
But you can go ahead and use multiple
mocks when you create your application.
Now you may have a question of
why would I want to do that?
Well, let's take another example
of our Recipes application.
We have an interface that
lists all of our recipes.
But I want to go ahead and
double-click on a recipe,
and I can look at it,
and I can make modifications.
We use one Managed Object Context
per Editor window for a recipe.
Now the benefit to this is that
we can edit any recipe we want
and save it and know that we're
just saving that piece of data.
You can imagine that if we started out,
we had one Managed Object Context,
and I say I want to
work with three recipes.
I open up each one.
I make changes to two of them
that I'm not quite done with.
I open up a third.
I make the changes I want, and I save.
You're saving the third one
because you're done with that,
but you're also saving the
other two because they're in
your Managed Object Context.
So you want to use multiple Managed
Object Contexts when you want to
segregate your work so that you can work
on separate things in separate places,
and then you can commit your data
at whenever point in time you want.
Now there's some heady things
that go along with this about what
happens if I'm working with the same
object in multiple contexts at once.
Framework really knows what to do,
so don't be worried about that.
So we've talked about the
persistent-stork-reward-enter.
We've talked about the
manage-object-context.
Let's talk about fetch requests.
And fetch requests are
how you get objects,
how you find them.
So the fetch request is, as it states,
it's kind of the bloodhound
for your objects.
It's your ability to specify a
query for the framework to go
ahead and find things for you.
Now, fetch request has three pieces
of important information.
The first is the entity.
So it's the piece from your
model that you're looking for.
It has a set of search criteria,
the ability to specify exactly what
you want to the framework so you don't
have to sort through a bunch of things.
And it also has things
called sort descriptors,
which allow you to sort the results when
they come back in a particular order,
if you're interested.
You can actually go ahead and create
fetch requests inside of the model.
We didn't show you that today,
but you will see that in later sessions.
So you can go ahead and templatize,
if you will, your fetch requests.
And you can include variable
substitution in those.
So you can make really,
really complex fetch requests,
storm in your model,
and then at runtime just pull them back,
substitute in your variables, and go.
Now fetch requests are evaluated
in the store wherever possible.
So we want to go ahead and make sure
that we're evaluating things in the
place where there's the most performance.
Now, one of those things that I talked
about was specifying search criteria.
And we do those through
the use of predicates.
How many people in the room
know about NSPredicate?
How many have used them before?
You guys have a bunch of reading to do.
Predicates are really,
really handy things to do.
And they're not useful in just Core Data.
They're useful in a lot of other places.
So you can create a
predicate programmatically.
We talked about defining them in your
model as part of a fetch request.
They're often based on user input.
So you take things that the user type in,
create a predicate out of it,
and go ahead and specify it
to you in your fetch request
to go ahead and search on.
They're used outside of Core Data,
as I just mentioned.
There's API on the NSArray to go ahead
and use predicates to filter them.
The metadata API, the spotlight API,
uses them heavily.
So when I talked about our
application being able to go and
find stores of our particular type,
we created a predicate
that matches our UTI type.
They're also used in the array
controllers very heavily.
So if you use bindings,
go take a look at predicates.
And predicates come in
three kinds of flavors.
There's the abstract class NS predicate.
There's the comparison predicate,
which is just doing a simple comparison.
And there's also the compound predicate,
which takes multiple predicates together.
So you don't necessarily
have to create this one big,
long predicate that has a
bunch of information in it.
You can create multiple predicates
and put them all together.
So what can you do with predicates?
Well, you can do simple comparisons,
like name equals soup.
You can do things like case
insensitive or diacritic insensitive.
You can do logical operations.
So I can start looking at attributes,
first name like something
or last name like something.
You can use predicates for relationships.
So it's not just about objects,
but you can walk across a relationship
to figure out from a recipe,
I'm looking for ingredients
with a certain name.
Or I'm looking for ingredients
that have a certain amount.
You can also do operations on them.
So if our ingredients had, for example,
a price, we could go ahead and,
if you look at the key path here,
sum the array of all the ingredients
with their price attribute.
So if we put an attribute
on the ingredients called
price and filled it all out,
that operation would tell us how
much all of the ingredients cost.
Or actually, not how much they cost,
much they cost,
but find them all the ones
that cost less than $50.
If you want to look at the
application we provide you,
we actually use predicates
quite extensively.
The filter field at the
top uses a predicate,
so we can go ahead and filter
the table view of recipes.
We also include something
called a Smart Group,
which shows you a group of recipes.
And we've included a nice
little API to go ahead and
create predicates on the fly,
so a nice little graphical interface.
We use a predicate, as I said,
for using Spotlight to find our stores.
And there's also something
called an inference core,
which is kind of a rules
system that we've put in that
uses predicates very heavily.
So if you want to take a look at those,
take a look in the App Delegate or
take a look in the Inference Core to
find more information about those.
So enough about predicates.
Let's get back to the fetch request.
How does a fetch request work?
So again, as I said,
the fetch request comes out,
and it's going to specify an entity,
potentially a predicate,
and potentially sort descriptors.
So you create one of these,
and you create them in your
managed object context,
and you say fetch.
So what happens?
Managed object context takes that,
hands it off to its
persistent store coordinator,
who then goes and figures out,
based on the blueprint,
which are the stores that has the
kind of data you're interested in,
which stores have the
entity you're interested in,
and passes the request off to those.
Each one of those will actually go
ahead and perform the fetch request
and get the objects that match.
In return,
the stores will hand it back to
the persistent store coordinator,
which coalesces all
those objects together,
takes them from their persisted
form into their managed object form,
and hands them back
to you for you to use.
So again,
the power of using multiple stores.
But a fetch request is just very simply
taking a request that you had and
pulling information from out of a store.
So let's talk about the Managed Object.
The Managed Object is
your data workhorse.
It's the unit of data that
you use to work in Core Data.
It's the thing that
you're going to fetch.
you're going to insert.
It's the thing you're going to save
and the thing you're going to delete.
These are the things that are created
as a result of you defining your model.
So you actually create Managed
Objects yourself when you want
to go ahead and insert them.
The framework returns Managed
Objects to you when you fetch things.
important thing to remember.
Each managed object is
described by a single entity.
So when you fetch something
out of the database,
when you fetch something
out of your store,
to be clear,
it's defined as by a single entity.
It's associated with a single context.
It's very important
when you think about it.
When you pull a piece of information out,
your managed object,
it is in one context.
That's not to say you can't
work with the same piece of
data in more than one context.
But at that point,
you'll have two separate managed objects.
So an object only is in
one context at a time.
And it has a unique identifier,
unique ID.
Core Data provides a basic class.
It's called the NSManagedObject.
And that implements both key value
coding and key value observing.
How many people are familiar with key
value coding and key value observing?
OK, good.
We provide a base class, NSManagedObject,
that provides you a lot
of facility with those.
Even so far as you define
attributes and relationships,
and you don't have to write any
code at all if you want to use them.
We go ahead and use key value coding
based on the information in the model
to allow you to get that information.
When you create your objects, again,
as I said, this is the workhorse.
This is where you're going
to do most of your work.
So it's important to consider options,
all of your options,
when you're adding smarts
to your application.
So your managed objects can actually
inherit from other managed objects.
So you can create a very
large inheritance hierarchy
in your application.
You can create your own
custom base class if you want.
You could subclass NSManageObject and
implement a lot of functionality there.
Or you could actually create custom
subclasses for each of your entities.
So in our example before,
we could have created custom subclasses
for recipe that maybe knows how to
generate the RTF for the recipe,
custom classes for ingredients that know
how to do something interesting there,
like put themselves in a shopping cart,
and a custom class for a chef
that knows how to go find a home
page or something like that.
So it's important to remember that
you have a lot of options when adding
smarts to your managed objects.
You can use custom managed
objects for a lot of things.
Validation is a very,
very good one if you want to
add custom validation rules.
Working with derived values,
if you want to have a complex
attribute of some kind that's
generated by another set of values,
you can use those.
And reacting to state changes.
If something changes,
especially something that's related,
you may want to do something interesting.
So you may want to create
custom classes for those.
What about referring to managed objects?
Each managed object has related to it
something called a managed object ID.
It's a unique identifier
that Core Data uses to,
as it pretty much sounds like,
identify the object.
What about referring to managed objects?
Each managed object has related to it
something called a managed object ID.
It's a unique identifier
that Core Data uses to,
as it pretty much sounds like,
identify the object.
So, I can save data anywhere I want,
but I can specify an identifier
so my application knows
exactly what I'm referring to,
when I'm referring to it,
and how to get back to it.
But it's important to note
that URIs are temporary.
I misspoke myself.
It's important to note that the URI for
a temporary object is temporary.
So if you create a new recipe
and you try to take the URI for
that and hand it to someone,
if you've saved that recipe,
by the time they click on it,
URI is no longer valid.
So temporary object, temporary URI,
saved object, valid URI.
Important thing to remember.
So what I'd like to do is
actually bring Adam back up here,
and we're going to show you how
to put some of these other things
together and create a quick
application using Core Data.
Adam?
Okay.
So I've done the work to
put together a decent model,
and now I want to build
an interface for it.
I'm going to go back to my project,
make sure I save my model.
And the project builder template,
or Xcode template,
for this project created
a interface file for me.
I'll bring that up.
And you can see there's
the project window,
an empty window it created for me,
and a menu.
Bring up an inspector.
So what I'd really like to do,
I've spent a decent amount of time
defining a pretty reasonable model here.
I'll close this to focus
on the part I want to show.
I'd really like to be able to take all
the information I put in about my recipe
and build a model directly from that.
The good news is that's
exactly what I can do.
I'm going to option drag my recipe entity
from the graphical view and drop it
right on the interface builder window.
When I do this,
it's going to ask me what kind
of interface I want to create.
I want to create an interface
for managing many recipes,
so I'll select many objects.
And when I do this,
it's going to put together a
fully working interface for me.
It's really powerful.
This isn't a canned thing.
It's actually doing a lot of
work that I could do by hand.
I'd like to explain some of the
things that happened right there.
So let's look at the left side.
There's a recipe array controller,
which is going to be used to provide
the values from the data store.
in the interface.
And I defined,
if I look at what this really is,
it's a basic array controller
using bindings configured
to use the recipe entity.
And because in my model I defined
some values like directions,
when it was last prepared,
the name and the chef,
it's put together a usable interface
for me including these items.
Now, I can go ahead.
This is a standard table view.
I can reorder the items.
I can resize.
I can manipulate them to make my
interface look the way I'd like.
And everything's going to
work just the way it should.
For example, I might want to have the
name above the directions.
And
And there are some other parts in this
interface that I had put together for me.
For example, this add button.
is actually connected to
the recipe controller,
so it will automatically ask
the controller to create a
new recipe entity for me.
is actually connected to
the recipe controller,
so it will automatically ask
the controller to create a
new recipe entity for me.
So I think I'm ready to go ahead
and try out my application.
Oh,
there's one other thing I'd like to do.
The application will
automatically save when I quit,
but I'd like to set up control
to save when I want to.
So I'm going to connect the Save button
to the action on my application delegate.
OK, now I'm ready to go.
Go back to Project Xcode.
Historical problem.
And go ahead and build
and run my application.
Okay, when I click the build and go,
it's going to compile the data model,
the class files, and the interface into
a real live application,
and I can go ahead and
start adding recipes.
Historical problem.
And go ahead and build
and run my application.
Okay, when I click the build and go,
it's going to compile the data model,
the class files, and the interface into
a real live application,
and I can go ahead and
start adding recipes.
And set the directions to ask
mom nicely to make French toast.
And there we go.
We've got one recipe.
Let's add another one.
We'll make that boiled egg.
And the directions are boil and egg.
OK.
Now I can go ahead and hit the Save.
And we'll save my data.
I quit.
Run my application again,
and there you go.
Saved my names and recipes.
So to prove that this is actually doing
something other than faking a demo,
I'm going to go and look at
the data file that it created.
Which by default is stored in
the application support directory
under the application name.
And I've chosen to use
the default data store,
which is an XML file.
When I bring this up,
You can see there's my French toast
and there's my boiled egg.
I can edit the data in here if I want to,
to say French toast.
No, I want pancakes.
"I save that data file,
and when I rerun my application,
you can see I've got pancakes,
which I can ask mom for."
So if you remember when
I set up my data model,
I spent some time adding some
rules about what were required
fields and what limits there were
on what data could go into them.
So if I go ahead and just delete
the name and I try to save,
It's going to tell me that
name is a required value.
Again, this is with no code.
It just followed the
rules from my data model,
and thanks to bindings,
gave me some useful feedback.
So I'll put that back to pancakes.
And I'll change the directions to some,
I'll delete the directions.
Again, if I save,
It tells me that directions
is a required value.
Also, if I tried to set directions
to be something short,
is going to tell me that
directions is too short.
That's because I set the rule
that directions had to be
at least five letters long.
Okay.
So now I can save.
And there we go.
We've got a working application.
Thank you, Matt.
Thanks, Adam.
So as you guys can see, it's very,
very easy to create a
managed object model,
drag it into Interface Builder,
and start creating your application.
And to reiterate Adam's point,
this is not a toy application.
It looks like it's not a widget
that you can't configure.
This is doing the heavy lifting for you.
It's taking in the
power of Cocoa bindings,
the power of the array controllers,
the wonderful benefits
of Interface Builder,
and all the wonderful,
wonderful stuff you get
from key value coding,
and just creating the interface for you.
And you can imagine if you
spent just a little more time,
you could create applications that
are actually pretty much fully
functional to get you up and running.
I want to cover two common
questions that people probably
have in their mind about Core Data.
I'd like to ask a question first.
How many people in the
audience think they have lots
of data for their application?
Lots of data.
So the first question
on your mind might be,
is Core Data fast enough?
To answer that question,
in our general performance tests,
we're able to get about 30,000
objects per second in a fetch request.
Now to put that in perspective,
when you think about what
does 30,000 things mean,
With the exception of the
completely enthused in music,
that's probably more songs
than people have in iTunes.
It's probably more addresses
than people have in Address Book.
And for those people that actually
delete mail every now and then,
it might actually be more mail
messages than people have in Mail.
Now, the idea here is not to say that
we create applications that work
within these particular cases.
The idea is that in most
of these applications,
you're typically not dealing
with 30,000 things all at once.
The framework provides
you lots of benefits,
lots of facilities for going ahead and
figuring out exactly what it is you want,
either creating a fetch request with a
predicate that's very specific to find
just the things you want to work with,
creating relationships
to objects that says,
you know, I'm on this recipe.
I only want these ingredients.
I don't need to fetch them
all and filter through them.
So the idea here is that while
we will always continue to
improve performance in Core Data,
use the other API the
framework gives you.
Use the smarts that are in your model
to keep your working set as lean
and mean as possible because you'll
get a lot of performance benefit
there just by using the framework and
the way it was designed to be used.
So the second question is, well,
what if I have lots of objects?
Is this thing going to
require a lot of memory?
Because we all know that we all
put more memory in our machines
than our managers say we should,
but our users sometimes
don't have as much.
The framework keeps around only
the objects that are needed.
So as objects are no longer needed,
we're going to go ahead and release them.
And we grow the graph on demand.
What does this mean?
It means that as we start
to need information,
we're going to go ahead and pull it in.
So the framework only creates objects
when it's absolutely necessary.
So for example, when Adam was going ahead
and fetching all the recipes,
when the framework brings those back,
it actually does something
which is create a fault.
So it actually hands you the recipe,
but to the framework,
it looks like a fault.
It basically is an unresolved
piece of information that says,
mm, they're going to want this.
But until they actually ask for it,
until they actually do something with it,
mm, let's only do a little bit of work.
When you ask for information,
when you ask the recipe for an attribute,
or a relationship,
or something interesting,
we convert the fault into a real object.
This means that there's one
underlying cache for all of
your pieces of information.
You could fetch the same
recipe 40,000 times,
and there's only going to be one
underlying cache for that recipe.
But we try and keep it lean and mean.
So we do a lot of work for you to
keep your memory footprint low.
So in summary,
burn this into your memory.
Create a postcard.
Make a pillowcase.
Do whatever you want.
But this is a very,
very important thing for Core Data,
is the architecture of working
with your managed objects,
working with a managed object context,
creating fetch requests
that are important,
creating a managed object model-- again,
I can't stress enough-- that is really,
really tuned for your application
and working with the data.
Lots of features,
lots of things to provide you
to work with your application.
The undo and redo support is really,
really handy.
One of the things Adam didn't
demo was we could actually
go ahead in this application,
make some changes, just hit Control-Z.
It's automatically bound up.
We're going to back out your changes
so you could back out anything
and save at any point in time.
You saw the automatic validation,
you saw the grouping and filtering,
you saw the automatic storing.
We didn't have to do anything
and it just automatically
saved into an XML file for you.
Part of that is the template code,
admittedly, but there's a lot of things
the framework provides for you.
And you're going to see a lot
of those later on this week.
So for more information,
take a look at the sample code that's
provided by the developer resources.
All right at your fingertips though,
already on your Tiger machines
are lots of information.
Is Malcolm Crawford here?
all the way over there, Malcolm Crawford,
god on high for technical documentation,
writes all the
documentation for Core Data.
Everyone should give him a
round of applause for us having
really great documentation.
All of your clapping means
that you've all read it,
right?
Otherwise,
you wouldn't know if it's good,
so don't be liars.
The other thing is there's examples
on your CD and actually on your disk.
On the disk in developer
examples Core Data,
outline edit, the tile puzzle,
event managers,
lots of different samples of data.
Also take a look at the Core Recipe
samples that we gave you on your CD.
You'll see the hands-on stuff tomorrow.
Who's coming to the 9
o'clock session tomorrow?
Come on.
You're missing out.
It's going to be a fun time.
Hands-on session tomorrow,
working with Command Line and
GUI apps with Core Data.
Also take a look at the Core Recipes app.
We've done a pretty decent job of
documenting everything that's in there.
And also look at the migration sample.
I would also-- how many people have
used the Quick Model feature in Xcode?
Anybody know that it's there?
Ooh, very, very few.
So as you saw, we actually took a look at
the Core Data modeling side.
But there's actually a corresponding
feature for class modeling,
which allows you to select something that
builds a class hierarchy and take a look
at it in the same modeling construct.
To do this, go into your project,
go into the Frameworks group,
and find the Core Data Framework.
Go back up under the Design menu
that we saw at the top.
Go under Class Model and say Quick Model.
And you'll get an entire class model
of the Core Data Framework hierarchy.
So you can actually go ahead
and look at all the methods,
see how they're all implemented.
It makes it very easy for
navigating the framework.
So please use the power of
Xcode to help you out with this.
And there are tons of sessions
and labs for Core Data.
Tomorrow morning at 9:00 is the hands-on.
We have two labs tomorrow,
one at 12:00 and one at 3:30.
There's more Cocoa binding
stuff tomorrow.
And there's also the Cocoa and
Core Data feedback on Friday and the
always popular advanced Core Data usages,
which is actually going to
be really great this year.
We've got a lot of really
good stuff to show you.
Who to contact?
Matthew Formica is the
Cocoa and Core Data evangelist.
But there's also the email lists
and everybody I know files bugs.
So please use the website.